Add MSBuild Examples (#5025)
dotnet/samples: msbuild/custom-task-code-generation/README.md

### Step 3, Change the AppSettingStronglyTyped.csproj

We need to make some changes on the project file. Now we have something simple like

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Build.Utilities.Core" Version="17.0.0" />
  </ItemGroup>

</Project>
```

We are going to generate a NuGet package, so first we need to add some basic information

```xml
<Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">

  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>
        <version>1.0.0</version>
        <title>AppSettingStronglyTyped</title>
        <authors>John Doe</authors>
        <description>Generates a strongly typed setting class base on a txt file</description>
        <tags>MyTags</tags>
        <copyright>Copyright ©Microsoft Company 2022</copyright>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Build.Utilities.Core" Version="17.0.0" />
  </ItemGroup>

</Project>
```

> Then, the dependencies of your MSBuild task must be packaged inside the package, they cannot be expressed as normal PackageReferences. We don't expose any regular dependencies to the outside world. It is not needed for the current example, because we don't have extra dependencies, but it is worth being prepared for and be aware of.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, the dependencies of your MSBuild task must be packaged inside the package, they cannot be expressed as normal PackageReferences. We don't expose any regular dependencies to the outside world. It is not needed for the current example, because we don't have extra dependencies, but it is worth being aware of this for other scenarios.
```

        <TargetsForTfmSpecificBuildOutput>$(TargetsForTfmSpecificBuildOutput);CopyProjectReferencesToPackage</TargetsForTfmSpecificBuildOutput>
        <DebugType>embedded</DebugType>
        <IsPackable>true</IsPackable>
    </PropertyGroup>

    <ItemGroup>
        <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Build.Utilities.Core" Version="17.0.0" />
    </ItemGroup>

    <Target Name="CopyProjectReferencesToPackage" DependsOnTargets="ResolveReferences">
        <ItemGroup>
            <!-- the dependencies of your MSBuild task must be packaged inside the package, they cannot be expressed as normal PackageReferences -->

            <!--example: <BuildOutputInPackage Include="$(PkgFParsec)/lib/netstandard2.0/FParsecCS.dll" />-->
        </ItemGroup>
    </Target>

</Project>

```

### Step 4, Include MSBuild props and targets in a package

We recommend first reading the basics about [props and target](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/customize-your-build) and then how to [include props and targets on a NuGet](https://docs.microsoft.com/nuget/create-packages/creating-a-package#include-msbuild-props-and-targets-in-a-package).

> In some cases, you might want to add custom build targets or properties in projects that consume your package, such as running a custom tool or process during build. You do this by placing files in the form <package_id>.targets or <package_id>.props within the \build folder of the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases, you might want to add custom build targets or properties in projects that consume your package, such as running a custom tool or process during a build. You do this by placing files in the form <package_id>.targets or <package_id>.props within the \build folder of the project.
```

    <!-- these lines pack the build props/targets files to the `build` folder in the generated package.
      by convention, the .NET SDK will look for build\<Package Id>.props and build\<Package Id>.targets
      for automatic inclusion in the build. -->
    <Content Include="build\AppSettingStronglyTyped.props" PackagePath="build\" />
    <Content Include="build\AppSettingStronglyTyped.targets" PackagePath="build\" />
</ItemGroup>
```

Then we must create a _build_ folder and inside two text files: _AppSettingStronglyTyped.props_ and _AppSettingStronglyTyped.targets_.
AppSettingStronglyTyped.props is imported very early in Microsoft.Common.props, and properties defined later are unavailable to it. So, avoid referring to properties that are not yet defined (and will evaluate to empty).

Directory.Build.targets is imported from Microsoft.Common.targets after importing .targets files from NuGet packages. So, it can override properties and targets defined in most of the build logic, or set properties for all your projects regardless of what the individual projects set. You can see the [import order](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/customize-your-build#import-order).

> _AppSettingStronglyTyped.props_ includes the task and define some prop with default values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_AppSettingStronglyTyped.props_ includes the task and define some property with default values:
```

        <taskForldername>lib</taskForldername>
        <taskFramework>netstandard2.0</taskFramework>
        <!--The folder where the custom task will be present. It points to inside the NuGet package. -->
        <CustomTasksFolder>$(MSBuildThisFileDirectory)..\$(taskForldername)\$(taskFramework)</CustomTasksFolder>
        <!--Reference to the assembly which contains the MSBuild Task-->
        <CustomTasksAssembly>$(CustomTasksFolder)\$(MSBuildThisFileName).dll</CustomTasksAssembly>
    </PropertyGroup>

    <!--Register our custom task-->
    <UsingTask TaskName="$(MSBuildThisFileName).$(MSBuildThisFileName)" AssemblyFile="$(CustomTasksAssembly)"/>

    <!--Task parameters default values, this can be overridden-->
    <PropertyGroup>
        <RootFolder Condition="'$(RootFolder)' == ''">$(MSBuildProjectDirectory)</RootFolder>
        <SettingClass Condition="'$(SettingClass)' == ''">MySetting</SettingClass>
        <SettingNamespace Condition="'$(SettingNamespace)' == ''">example</SettingNamespace>
        <SettingExtensionFile Condition="'$(SettingExtensionFile)' == ''">mysettings</SettingExtensionFile>
    </PropertyGroup>
</Project>
```

> Beyond the [build properties](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/walkthrough-using-msbuild#build-properties) defined, actually, an important part of this file is the task registration, MSBuild must know how to locate and run the assembly that contains the task class. Tasks are registered using the [UsingTask element (MSBuild)](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/usingtask-element-msbuild). TaskName is the name of the task to reference from the assembly. This attribute should always specify full namespaces. AssemblyFile is the file path of the assembly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beyond the [build properties](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/walkthrough-using-msbuild#build-properties) defined, actually, an important part of this file is the task registration. MSBuild must know how to locate and run the assembly that contains the task class. Tasks are registered using the [UsingTask element (MSBuild)](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/usingtask-element-msbuild). TaskName is the name of the task to reference from the assembly. This attribute should always specify full namespaces. AssemblyFile is the file path of the assembly.
```

> The _AppSettingStronglyTyped.props_ will be automatically included when the package is installed, then our client has the task available and some default values. However, it is never used. In order to put this code in action we need to define some targets on _AppSettingStronglyTyped.targets_ file which also will be also automatically included when the package is install:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _AppSettingStronglyTyped.props_ will be automatically included when the package is installed, then our client has the task available and some default values. However, it is never used. In order to put this code in action we need to define some targets on _AppSettingStronglyTyped.targets_ file which also will be also automatically included when the package is installed:
```

<Project xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/developer/msbuild/2003">

    <!--Defining all the text files input parameters-->
    <ItemGroup>
        <SettingFiles Include="$(RootFolder)\*.$(SettingExtensionFile)" />
    </ItemGroup>

    <!--It is generated a target which is executed before the compilation-->
    <Target Name="BeforeCompile" Inputs="@(SettingFiles)" Outputs="$(RootFolder)\$(SettingClass).generated.cs">
        <!--Calling our custom task-->
        <AppSettingStronglyTyped SettingClassName="$(SettingClass)" SettingNamespaceName="$(SettingNamespace)" SettingFiles="@(SettingFiles)">
            <Output TaskParameter="ClassNameFile" PropertyName="SettingClassFileName" />
        </AppSettingStronglyTyped>
        <!--Our generated file is included to be compiled-->
        <ItemGroup>
            <Compile Remove="$(SettingClassFileName)" />
            <Compile Include="$(SettingClassFileName)" />
        </ItemGroup>
    </Target>

    <!--The generated file is deleted after a general clean. It will force the regeneration on rebuild-->
    <Target Name="AfterClean">
        <Delete Files="$(RootFolder)\$(SettingClass).generated.cs" />
    </Target>
</Project>
```

> The first step is the creation of an [InputGroup](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/msbuild-items) which represents the text files (there could be more than one) to read and it will be some of our task parameters. There are default for the location and the extension where we look for, but you can override the values defining the properties on the client MSBuild project file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step is the creation of an [InputGroup](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/msbuild-items) which represents the text files (there could be more than one) to read and it will be some of our task parameters. There are defaults for the location and the extension to search for, but you can override the values defining the properties on the client MSBuild project file.
```

Then we define two [MSBuild targets](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/msbuild-targets). We [extends the MSBuild process](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/how-to-extend-the-visual-studio-build-process) overriding predefined targets:

> 1. BeforeCompile: The goal is to call our custom task to generate the class and include the class to be compiled. Tasks that are inserted before core compilation is done. Input and Output fields are related to [incremental build](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/incremental-builds). If all output items are up-to-date, MSBuild skips the target. This incremental build of the target can significantly improve the build speed. An item is considered up-to-date if its output file is the same age or newer than its input file or files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. BeforeCompile: The goal is to call our custom task to generate the class and include the class to be compiled. Tasks are inserted before core compilation is done. Input and Output fields are related to [incremental build](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/incremental-builds). If all output items are up-to-date, MSBuild skips the target. This incremental build of the target can significantly improve the build speed. An item is considered up-to-date if its output file is the same age or newer than its input file or files.
```

1. AfterClean: The goal is to delete the generated class file after a general clean happens. Tasks that are inserted after the core clean functionality is invoked. It forces the generation on MSBuild rebuild target execution.

### Step 5, Generates the NuGet package

We can use Visual Studio (Right-click on the project and select 'pack').
We can also do it by command line. Move to the folder where the AppSettingStronglyTyped.csproj is present, and execute:

```dotnetcli
//-o is to define the output, we are choose the current folder
dotnet pack -o .
```

Congrats!! You must have `\AppSettingStronglyTyped\AppSettingStronglyTyped\AppSettingStronglyTyped.1.0.0.nupkg` generated.

.nupkg files are a zip file. You can open with a zip tool. On the build folder the .target and .props files must be present. On lib\netstandard2.0\ folder the .dll file must be present. On the root must be the AppSettingStronglyTyped.nuspec file.

### Step 6, Generate console app and test our new MSBuild task

> Now, we are going to create a standard .Net Core console app for testing the NuGet package generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we are going to create a standard ..NET Core console app for testing the NuGet package generated.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Now, we are going to create a standard .NET Core console app for testing the NuGet package generated.
```

> :warning: We need to avoid generating a MSBuild custom task in the same MSBuild process which is going to consume it. The new project should be in a completely different Visual Studio Solution or the new project uses a dll pre-generated and re-located from the standard output.

Author: @v-fearam can you clarify what we're trying to say here?

> :warning: We need to avoid generating a MSBuild custom task in the same MSBuild process which is going to consume it. The new project should be in a completely different Visual Studio Solution or the new project uses a dll pre-generated and re-located from the standard output.

Reviewer 2: Let me try so add information to let you know. I don't know how to explain in a good way.
1- You have a Custom Task called "MyTask"
2- You have a project, "MyProject" which use "MyTask"
3- You will get an error if you try to build  "MyProject" and "MyTask" in one shot. You can't build a msbuild task which is going to be use in the same build execution is used . You need to build first "MyTask", and the build  "MyProject" which reference MyTask.dll
It is clear the idea now? Then obviously you can explain in a different way.

    </PropertyGroup>
```

Now, we are going to rebuild again and the class is on _MSBuildConsoleExample_ namespace. In this way you can redefine the generated class name(SettingClass), the text extension files(SettingExtensionFile) to be use as input and the location (RootFolder) of them if you like.

Go to Program.cs and change the hardcoded 'Hello Word!!' to our constant

```csharp
        static void Main(string[] args)
        {
            Console.WriteLine(MySetting.Greeting);
        }
```

We can execute the program, it will greet our generated class.

_Note:_ It is a good practice include **PrivateAssets="All"** on the PackageReference. The project which use the MSBuild Custom Task as NuGet. It should look like

```xml
<ItemGroup>
        <PackageReference Include="AppSettingStronglyTyped" Version="1.0.0" PrivateAssets="All"/>
</ItemGroup>
```

It means that assets will be consumed but won't flow to the parent project. [More information](https://docs.microsoft.com/nuget/consume-packages/package-references-in-project-files#controlling-dependency-assets)

### Step 7 (Optional), Check what is going on during build process

> It is possible to compile using a command line command. We need to go to the MSBuildConsoleExample\MSBuildConsoleExample folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to compile using a command-line command. We need to go to the MSBuildConsoleExample\MSBuildConsoleExample folder.
```

        <OutputType>Exe</OutputType>
        <TargetFramework>net6.0</TargetFramework>
        <RootFolder>$(MSBuildProjectDirectory)</RootFolder>
        <SettingClass>MySetting</SettingClass>
        <SettingNamespace>MSBuildConsoleExample</SettingNamespace>
        <SettingExtensionFile>mysettings</SettingExtensionFile>
    </PropertyGroup>

    <ItemGroup>
        <SettingFiles Include="$(RootFolder)\*.mysettings" />
    </ItemGroup>

    <Target Name="GenerateSetting" BeforeTargets="CoreCompile" Inputs="@(SettingFiles)" Outputs="$(RootFolder)\$(SettingClass).generated.cs">
        <AppSettingStronglyTyped SettingClassName="$(SettingClass)" SettingNamespaceName="$(SettingNamespace)" SettingFiles="@(SettingFiles)">
            <Output TaskParameter="ClassNameFile" PropertyName="SettingClassFileName" />
        </AppSettingStronglyTyped>
        <ItemGroup>
            <Compile Remove="$(SettingClassFileName)" />
            <Compile Include="$(SettingClassFileName)" />
        </ItemGroup>
    </Target>

    <Target Name="ForceReGenerateOnRebuild" AfterTargets="CoreClean">
        <Delete Files="$(RootFolder)\$(SettingClass).generated.cs" />
    </Target>
</Project>
```

> _Note:_ You can notice we are using another way to order the targets [(BeforeTarget and AfterTarget)](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/target-build-order#beforetargets-and-aftertargets). The note on [override predefined targets](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/how-to-extend-the-visual-studio-build-process#override-predefined-targets) section on the MSBuild extension article on the says: 'SDK-style projects have an implicit import of targets after the last line of the project file. This means that you cannot override default targets unless you specify your imports manually'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Note:_ We are using another way to order the targets [(BeforeTarget and AfterTarget)](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/target-build-order#beforetargets-and-aftertargets). The note on [override predefined targets](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/how-to-extend-the-visual-studio-build-process#override-predefined-targets) section on the MSBuild extension article on the says: 'SDK-style projects have an implicit import of targets after the last line of the project file. This means that you cannot override default targets unless you specify your imports manually'.
```

> _Note:_ You can notice we are using another way to order the targets [(BeforeTarget and AfterTarget)](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/target-build-order#beforetargets-and-aftertargets). The note on [override predefined targets](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/how-to-extend-the-visual-studio-build-process#override-predefined-targets) section on the MSBuild extension article on the says: 'SDK-style projects have an implicit import of targets after the last line of the project file. This means that you cannot override default targets unless you specify your imports manually'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Note:_ We are using another way to order the targets [(BeforeTarget and AfterTarget)](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/target-build-order#beforetargets-and-aftertargets). The note in the [Override predefined targets](https://docs.microsoft.com/visualstudio/msbuild/how-to-extend-the-visual-studio-build-process#override-predefined-targets) section in the MSBuild extension article says: 'SDK-style projects have an implicit import of targets after the last line of the project file. This means that you cannot override default targets unless you specify your imports manually.'
```
